Good afternoon.
My name is Mark Tozer-Vilches.
I'm the Desktop Hardware
Evangelist in Apple Computer and
Worldwide Developer Relations.
Welcome to session 506,
performance optimization tools in depth.
Now, optimization means a lot of things
to a lot of different people.
It can be from trying to get your
application to launch faster,
access the network faster,
get higher frame rates.
Bottom line is, it's about speed,
it's about performance.
It's about getting your
application to run faster than
what it currently does today,
or faster than what maybe your
competitive application does.
Bottom line is,
there's a common denominator.
You're looking to increase performance,
and you need to know where that
performance can be increased.
In order to do that,
you need tools to be able to allow you to
understand where that work can be done.
Apple has created a set of
tools for developers shipped
freely on the developer tools
that you'll hear about today.
I'd like to introduce up here
a member of that team that's
involved in creating these tools,
Mr.
Sanjay Patel of the
Architecture Performance Group.
Thanks, Mark.
So my name is Sanjay Patel.
I'm in the Architecture and
Performance group.
We're going to start off today
by talking a little bit about G5
from a programmer's perspective,
some issues you may run into
as you're moving code from G3
and G4 over to the new systems.
So to start off with, first of all,
the 970, the PowerPC 970,
it's the official chip name,
is a very super scaler,
very wide and very deep machine.
It's based on IBM's Power4 architecture.
It's a true 64-bit chip of
the PowerPC AS architecture.
It has the full Altevec instruction set,
the full 162 instructions,
all implemented in hardware.
Also has a high bandwidth
point-to-point interface,
so this is a little different than a bus.
What we actually have is direct
connections between the processor
and the memory controller.
And we also supply automated
hardware prefetch engines,
so what these guys do is they'll
start detecting patterns of memory
accesses and prefetching those memory
accesses into local caches for you.
So here's a picture of the die.
You might have seen this in the keynote
or at the 970 presentation yesterday.
But what we have here
is two load store units,
independent, two fixed point units,
two IEEE compliant independent
floating point units,
The full set of the
four Altevec subunits,
the ALU as well as the Permute.
A branch unit and a unit to handle
condition register logical operations.
So here's another view
from the top there.
You see instructions
would be in the L1 cache.
They'll go into fetch,
sit around in some queues.
They'll go to dispatch,
where they can be dispatched
up to four instructions plus
one branch on every clock.
So this is really a wide machine.
There you can see you get fed into 10
issue queues to the 12 execution units.
So again, this is just the widest machine
you've probably dealt with.
How does this all compare against G4?
Well, to keep everything--all
these units flowing,
the core can actually have over
200 instructions in flight,
versus a little over 30 in the G4
if you count the completion buffers
as well as the various queues.
The pipeline stages have been expanded,
so we're at 16 stages for a simple
instruction versus 7 in the G4.
As I mentioned,
we have two load store units versus one,
as well as two floating point
units versus one in the G4.
There are two general
purpose fixed point units,
where in the G4 there were
three dedicated simple
units and one complex unit.
Vector is similar.
There's the ALU,
which includes floating point,
complex integer, simple integer,
and the permute unit.
If we talk about the caches,
there's quite a few differences here.
First and foremost for programmers
is the cache line size has changed.
It's 128 bytes where
it used to be 32 bytes.
The L1 data cache is the same size,
but it's a two-way associative
design and write-through versus
eight-way and write-back on the G4.
The instruction cache has been doubled,
so we're at 64K now,
although it's a direct map design
versus eight-way associative on the G4.
L2 cache is also doubled,
so now we're at a full half meg.
Also an eight-way associative
in both G4 and G5.
The replacement algorithm is
LRU versus random on the G4.
There is no L3 cache on the G5,
whereas on the G4 you
had up to two megabytes.
Now that's partially made up for by
the fact that processor bandwidth is
just tremendously higher on the G5.
It's up to 3.5 gigabytes a second
effective in each direction,
both to and from memory simultaneously,
versus a 1.3 gigabyte per
second bus for the G4.
On the other side of
the memory controller,
we've doubled the width
of the DDR interface,
as well as increased the clock frequency.
So more than twice the bandwidth is here,
available from the DDR chips.
6.4 gigs versus 2.7 gigs on the G4.
So, what does this all mean from
a programmer's perspective?
Well, there are going to be some things
you're going to have to look out
for as you're porting your code
and optimizing it on this chip.
And so the first thing you'll notice is
that there are more pipeline stages here,
which means instruction
latencies have grown from G4.
So,
how do you work around that in your code?
Well, you should do more in parallel,
right?
So manually unroll important
loops or try to use compiler flags
such as unroll reloops with GCC.
You can also schedule your code using
M2 and equal 970 with the new GCC 3.3.
Now similarly,
because the pipeline is longer,
branch mispredictions
are going to cost more.
It's just going to take longer
to recover from a mispredict.
So there are several
solutions you can use here.
If you're coding in C,
GCC offers a built-in expect.
So that's for a very
highly predictable branch,
such as maybe exception code.
You expect it not to be taken very much.
You can use this macro built-in expect.
If you're coding in assembly,
we have these new plus plus and minus
minus suffixes for all branches.
So either highly taken
or highly not taken.
Best solution is to just not do branches,
right?
So in floating points, you have fcell.
That's enabled with FastMath,
and what that allows you to
do is a conditional move in
floating point registers.
In the vector domain, you have vcell,
very similar operation,
you use it with masks.
In the integer domain,
you have the carry bit.
So this can be used for min
and max type of operations.
You can also use masks to avoid
branches when you're doing integer,
what effectively would
be conditional moves.
And then feedback directed optimization
is something most programmers don't try,
but this can be very effective on G5.
Because if you can have a
representative run of your program,
let the compiler annotate that run,
and then mark all branches with
highly not taken or highly taken,
this can be very effective for improving
performance on this long pipeline.
So as I said, the data cache is quite
different than it was on G4.
And the most important thing
here is that it's 128 by line.
What can you do to work around that?
Well,
that's either a win or a loss for you,
depending on your code, right?
If you have a lot of locality, well,
you're probably going to incur one miss,
where you would have had
four misses on the G4 system.
So,
you must design your algorithms and your
data structures to move through data--to
move through memory sequentially,
continuously, if possible.
Okay?
That's also going to trigger
the hardware prefetcher,
and this is very powerful,
because it will amortize all
of the latency up to memory.
So that's the next topic.
Because it is a point-to-point
interface to the memory controller,
latency--effective latency may be higher
than what you've seen on a G4 system.
And that's because to maintain coherency,
you have to go to the memory
controller and then bounce
back to another processor.
What can you do to avoid
any of those penalties?
Well, software prefetching--so there
are several instructions.
And of course,
the hardware prefetcher is the best
solution because it's self-paced,
and it'll be synchronous with your code.
As you miss,
the hardware detects those misses,
detects the pattern,
and prefetches lines for you.
You can also batch your loads.
So say you need to access
several pieces of data,
you know you're going
to need them in advance.
Try to group those loads together,
because the bus can
support several misses.
simultaneously.
So the Data Stream Touch instruction
from the Altevec instruction set
is execution serializing on the
G5 because it's mapped onto the
existing hardware prefetch mechanism.
So what can you do to avoid DST?
Well, first of all,
you can probably remove it.
It is just a hint,
so there's no guarantee that
DST is going to be effective
for you in the first place.
The preferred solution is to
rely on the hardware prefetcher,
so assuming you have
contiguous memory accesses,
that's going to
automatically work for you.
Now, if you have non-contiguous accesses,
we recommend that you replace a single
DST with several DCBT instructions.
That's a Data Cache Block Touch.
So you would issue one
of those for each line.
So, legacy code that uses DCBZ,
which is the zeroing of a cache block,
or DCBA, the allocation of a cache block,
is going to perform very poorly on G5.
Why is that?
Well, DCBZ is emulated effectively
to only work on 32 bytes,
and we had to do this to ensure backwards
compatibility with existing code.
DCBA is not implemented on G5,
so that's just going to
be an illegal instruction.
You'll end up in an exception handler
and then bounce back to your code.
So this is just going to be tremendously
bad for any performance-critical code,
and the only reason you would
have used these instructions is
because it's performance-critical.
So the solution is get the
DCBZs and DCBAs out of the code.
Again, DCBA is just a performance hint,
so that shouldn't affect
any kind of functionality.
If you do need to zero cache lines,
we would recommend that you use
memset or b0 rather than trying to
roll your own zeroing functions.
But if you do need a DCBZ type of
function or an allocate of a cache line,
we have this new mnemonic called DCBZL.
And that's going to effectively
zero out whatever the native cache
line length is for any system,
whether it's G3, G4, or G5.
So here's an example of how to use DCBZL.
Now, for those of you who have used DCBZ,
you'd say, "Well,
the original definition of
DCBZ was simply to zero out
the native cache line length,
so what have we changed?" Well,
the reason we have to have this
new mnemonic is because most
programmers ignored that warning.
They coded for 32 bytes,
and now they're going to get bitten.
So what we'd much rather have you
do is code based on line size,
so effectively stride through
memory based on the line size,
which you can get from
the operating system,
whatever the current line
size is on the system.
And of course,
if you're just doing a memset operation,
we'd much prefer that
you use memset or B0.
So, synchronization primitives--
this would be locks,
sinks, iSinks-- they are going to be
more costly on this architecture,
on this chip, than they were on G4.
And that's for two reasons: one,
the longer pipelines, and two,
the longer latencies to memory.
So, this is a tough one,
but what you have to do is just make sure
all your locking is absolutely necessary.
Minimize the lock hold time so you're
not contending for locks as much.
And of course,
ensure that each lock is in its
own cache line so you don't have
fighting between processors.
So scheduling is crucial for this chip,
and it's going to require
recompiling or even hand
scheduling for optimal performance.
So what we recommend is you use GCC 3.3,
which has a pipeline model
and scheduling model for 970.
And the other thing you can do for really
performance critical code is understand
dispatch group formation using SHARC.
And for those of you who
don't know what SHARC is,
we'll get to that in just a minute.
So in summary,
this is a very parallel core.
You have two, basically,
of each unit-- LSUs, FPUs, FXUs,
lots of renames,
lots of instructions in flight.
So if you have very synchronous code,
it's simply not gonna take
advantage of this core.
So what you want to do is, of course,
unroll and schedule.
You can also use AlteVec to calculate
up to a theoretical peak of 32
gigaflops on a 2 gigahertz system,
a dual.
The 970 has the full precision
hardware square root,
so you don't need to make calls to any
libm functions for square root anymore.
If you're using GCC, we offer this flag,
PowerPC-GPopt.
We also have native long long support
because this is a 64-bit chip.
It can natively do double word lengths
in leaf functions using PowerPC 64.
So again, the system and the chip are all
designed for high bandwidth.
There's incredible
bandwidth to the L1 cache,
between the caches, and out to memory.
32, 64, and effectively 3.5 gigabytes per
second in each direction on the bus.
Take advantage of that
by using streaming,
using software streaming and
hardware streaming prefetch.
So again,
the optimal cache control instruction,
rather than a DST,
is to use DCBT to prefetch.
If you have a DST that
covered a lot of ground,
multiple cache lines will then
issue multiple DCBT's in its place.
Don't use DCBZ, because that's emulated.
Use the DCBZL instruction,
but be careful if you're using it.
Make sure you account
for cache line size.
And again, DCBA and DCBI are illegal,
so those just need to
be removed from code.
Okay,
so we've talked a lot of theory here.
How you actually get down and dirty with
your code and figure out what's going on.
Well that's where Chud comes in,
so I'd like to introduce
Nathan Slingerland.
Okay, thank you Sanjay.
So hopefully a lot of you were introduced
to CHUD tools last year at WWDC,
at least the version 2 tools.
And this year we're happy to give
you the version 3 of the tools,
and we have a lot of enhancements
and improvements to that.
But basically the CHUD tools are
a suite of low-level performance
analysis tools written by Apple's
Architecture and Performance Group.
And they give you access to the
performance counters and the processor
memory controller operating system.
and using these counters with
CHUD you can find problems in
your code and improve your code.
And of course it's free.
So it's on the Developer Tools CD,
and it's also on the website.
So in 3.0,
we have several classes of tools,
profiling tools,
so tools to find out where
things are happening.
These include Shark.
So this is the successor to Shikari,
if you've used that.
And we'll get to all the
great new features it has.
Monster is a spreadsheet
for performance events,
and it has a lot of great new features,
too.
Saturn is a new tool for visualizing
function calling behavior.
For tracing,
so if you've ever done Altevec or
a very processor critical code,
sometimes it's useful to see how things
are actually happening on the processor.
So we have Amber to take an instruction
level trace of a particular program,
and then Assets is a program
to analyze this trace,
or SIMG4,
PowerPC 7400 cycle accurate simulator,
and soon SIMG5, so you'll be able to
simulate for the PowerPC 970.
And of course,
we provide the CHUD framework.
So this is the API we
use in all our tools.
And you can use this to make your
own tools or call into the CHUD tools
and have them do what you need.
Okay, so the performance counters.
These are in the processor and memory
controller and operating system,
as I mentioned.
And what these do,
they count interesting low-level
performance events that things such
as cache misses or instruction stall
cycles that would otherwise you'd
have to use a simulator to find
out what's happening at this level.
Page faults in the operating system,
you can find out when those happen.
And the Chud tools let you
configure these counters,
tell them what to count,
record the counts,
and then you can use the tools
to look at what the result is.
Okay, so the first tool we're
going to talk about is Shark.
Shark is a system-wide profiling tool.
So you can use it to profile a process,
a thread, or the entire system if
you want to look at that.
The most basic usage
is just a time profile.
So this will show you where
the hotspots are in the system,
where the system is spending its time.
You can also use any of the
performance counter events.
So you can get an event profile
to see where hardware events
relate to your source code.
For example, where cache misses might be
coming from in your code.
We capture everything: drivers, kernel,
applications.
So if you're a driver or
kernel extension writer,
you can also use CHUD to see
the call stack and find out
where things are coming from.
And of course, we're very low overhead.
This is all handled inside of the--
inside of our own kernel extension.
Once you've gathered this session
that you're interested in,
take in the samples that
you want to look at.
We provide automated analysis,
so we annotate your source code,
disassembly of your source code,
give you optimization tips
about how to improve your code.
And there's also static analysis.
You can use this to just look for,
for example,
DCBA instructions in your code,
if you want to make sure you
catch every instance of that.
There's a command line version,
so this is both scriptable and
you can also use it--you know,
you can telnet into a machine and
use this from the command line.
And of course we can save sessions and
you can give them to your colleagues,
pass them around,
whatever you'd like to do.
So Monster is a more direct
interface to the counters.
This lets you look directly at
the results of the counters.
You can configure them using Monster,
collect the PMC data
based on timed intervals,
hotkey, event counts,
every 10,000 cache misses, for example.
And then you can view the result
in a spreadsheet or a chart.
In addition to just the
raw performance counts,
there is a built-in shortcut language.
This uses an infix computational
language that you can program your
own metrics that you're interested in,
or you can use the built-in ones,
things like memory bandwidth,
bandwidth over the memory bus,
or cycles per instruction,
a variety of things.
There's a command line version of
Monster provided as well for your
scripting and remote sessions,
and you can also save and
review these sessions as well.
Okay, so the best way to see how to use
these tools is with a demonstration.
So what we're going to look at is a
program called the Noble Ape Simulation.
This is written by Tom Barbele,
and he's simulating apes
on a tropical island.
And these apes can think,
and he's simulating the
biological environment,
so the food and the other
animals on the island,
as well as the cognitive
processes of the apes.
I mean, obviously,
simple cognitive processes such as
desire and fear and those kind of things.
So this is open source,
and for more information,
please check out his
website at nobleape.com.
So let's switch to the demo machine.
and see this C-noble ape in action.
Okay, so this is the map window.
Here we just showed, this is the island,
right?
And each red dot represents
an ape running around the
island doing its thing.
And we can select one ape at a time.
That's the ape with the
red box around him there.
And for this ape we can see his brain,
what's happening in his
brain in the brain window,
right?
And of course, any good performance study
requires a performance metric,
and our metric is ape
thoughts per second.
So this is the, for the original code,
we're getting, we have this metric.
So around 1200, 1300 or so.
Okay, so the first thing we'd like to do,
we're gonna launch Shark,
and we'll see what's
happening in the system.
Okay, so this is the main Shark window,
and it's really pared down and simple,
just to let you start your work.
By default,
we come up with the time profile,
so this would be the most
common thing you'd use it for.
We provide a bunch of other built-in
shortcuts and configurations.
You can, of course,
you can create your own using
any of the performance counters.
But for now,
we're going to use time profile.
There's a start button
here for starting sampling,
but you can also use the-- there's a
global hotkey so that Shark doesn't
have to be in the foreground.
It can be, you know, in the background,
and you can start it.
So we'll use that hotkey.
We'll take a 5 or 10 seconds sample.
See what's happening.
So here's the profile.
What we've done here,
this is just listing the functions
that it sampled inside Noble Ape
from most sampled to least sampled.
So when you're optimizing,
you wanna work on what's
running the most of the time,
then you're gonna get the most
benefit out of optimizing that code.
So we see that Noble Ape
is 50% of the system.
This is the process pop-up, right?
And this is like top,
it lists what was running in the system.
It's kind of strange, 50% of the time,
even though we know that we're CPU bound.
Well, if we go to the thread pop-up here,
you can see that in fact,
it's single threaded.
So this is,
we're running Noble Ape on a Power Mac G5
that has dual two gigahertz processors.
So, all right, so next step,
we wanna thread this thing, right,
since we wanna take
advantage of both processors.
So this is the heavy view
that we're looking at.
There's a heavy profile
of view and a tree view.
The heavy view,
we can open up these disclosure
triangles and see how we
got to this heavy function.
So we started in main,
we called plat cycle,
called control cycle,
called cycle ape troop,
called the cycle troop brain scaler,
this important function.
So we know our code,
and we know that we can't really
split the processing of things
between simulation cycles,
right?
The way this app works, there's a,
you know, it does a simulation cycle,
and, you know,
within each simulation cycle,
it's processing a bunch
of ape simulation cycles.
Well, the simulation cycles
themselves are not independent.
They depend on one another, right?
But we know that the
apes are independent.
They're independent thinking apes, so,
you know,
we can parallelize it at that level.
We can process the apes in parallel.
For each simulation cycle.
So that's what we did.
We threaded that to split
up the number of apes.
We have 64 apes to split it
between two threads evenly.
So you'll note that the brain
rate is originally around 1,200.
When we do this, we get around 20,
almost 2,400, not quite.
That's pretty good.
We've gotten a nice speed
up just from threading,
from taking advantage of
that second processor.
So let's profile again
and see what's going on.
Okay.
So now we can see that
in the process pop-up,
we can see that Noble Ape
is taking up a much more
significant amount of the system.
That's a good thing.
And we can see from the thread
pop-up that we have our main thread,
that's the 9.2%, which spun
up two computational threads,
each about 40% of the time.
So, the next thing we'd like to do is
actually optimize this function.
This function is important to us, right?
It's almost 90% of the
time is spent in here.
So, if we double click on this,
Shark will present us with
our source that's been
highlighted where we've sampled.
So, this tells us where in our
source code we're spending time.
So, it's actually inside of this
Cycle Troop Brain Scaler,
it's just--it's this for loop.
So we can see that this for loop
actually represents about 94%
of the time in this function.
Okay.
So I should probably talk about a
couple of these other things here.
Oh yeah, well so the scroll bar at
the side is like an overview.
You can easily jump to the
hot spots in your code.
Right.
So it's colored accordingly, right.
A brighter yellow means more samples.
At the top we have a source file list.
This is, you know,
sometimes you can have more than one
source file contributing to a particular
function with header files and like that.
And this function popup is like
what you have in Project Builder.
You can easily jump to
different functions.
And then we have the edit button.
So what this allows you to do is
it will jump into Project Builder
at the same selected line.
Right.
So you can easily go to where you
want to edit and change something
once you know where the problem is.
Okay.
So let's go back to Shark.
and what Shark does is it
provides us with advice.
That's what this little
exclamation point button is.
It's advice for us.
It's calling something out.
And so there's two bits of advice here,
but we'll focus just on the first one.
So this loop contains
8-bit integer computation.
And if you--obviously if you're
spending a lot of time in this
8-bit integer computation,
it might be a good idea to use Altevec
to really improve the speed of this code.
So that was what we did.
That was our next step.
So let's, I guess, let's go try that out.
"Get the ring." So,
that's a nice speed up,
but we're not done yet.
That's good.
So, let's profile again.
Let's see where we're spending time now.
We'll double click again on this.
We see the vector function shows
up at the top of the profile.
And this is the vector code.
So a lot of you are probably--if
you've used Shikari,
you saw the assembly view.
If you double-click on any
of these--any source line,
it's going to jump to the assembly
view that you're familiar with.
And if you double-click on the assembly,
it'll jump back.
And it's going to highlight the
line--the instruction or instructions
that correspond to that source line.
So you can see--this can give
you an idea of how good the
code gen is for your compiler,
right?
right, how many,
what kind of instructions it's
generating for each source line.
And, okay, so if you've seen this before,
the columns here, we have samples,
how many times we
sampled each instruction,
address,
obviously the address and instruction,
the instructions themselves,
and switch between various
views of the address.
Cycles is the latency and throughput
of a particular instruction,
so these are for the 970, right,
that's the CPU model down at the
right-- lower right-hand corner there,
tells you that.
And in the comment column,
various things about this code,
and of course the source file at the end.
Now, one of the nice things that
we give you is an ability to
visualize dispatch groups.
So if we go to this option,
we can turn this on.
If you remember the diagram that Sanjay
showed earlier with the dispatch,
we can see here how they--usually
between four and five instructions,
dispatch, this would be in each cycle.
So this can give you a good
idea about how things are
actually behaving on the machine.
So the other thing we provide
too is this functional unit and
dispatch slot utilization graph.
So you want to talk a little bit to that?
Right.
So on 970, as a programmer,
the key bottleneck you'll have to face
is maximizing dispatch group width,
because that's one of the
narrower points in the core,
because it's four instructions
wide plus a branch.
So what we offer you here in dispatch
slot utilization over here on the
right is the average group size.
You can see how effectively is
your code taking advantage of
this really wide issue machine,
wide dispatch machine.
And dispatch defines where
instructions are issued to,
which functional units.
So here you see a map of the 12
functional units that I talked about.
And you can see that the
units are symmetrical,
like the two LSUs here.
If there's a big imbalance between, say,
one of these, the LSUs-- one is doing a
lot and one's not-- well,
that's something that you could
probably correct with scheduling
or reordering your code,
because what you want to do is
balance the execution units.
Right?
You don't want half the chip doing all
the work and the other half sitting idle.
All of that is defined
by dispatch groups.
So that's why we've put dispatch
group modeling into Shark.
- Right, so you can select a few, right?
I mean, you can do the dynamic selection,
right?
- So this is dynamic.
You select a few instructions and it'll
tell you where they got mapped to.
The charts update and the
numbers will update it with it.
Great.
So this can help you, obviously,
on the Power Mac G5, tuning your code.
But let's go back to the source view.
And if we look a little
closer at our vector code,
you remember we vectorized
this inner loop that we saw
was taking up 94% of the time,
right?
Well now that loop is still important,
but it's taking up a smaller portion
of the time in this function.
We can see also that up at the
top and bottom of this function,
we're spending more time-- more time
relatively speaking-- in the scalar code,
right?
The two loops that we didn't touch.
So, this code is very similar
to the other loop,
it's almost exactly the same,
and I believe Sharpe will point this out,
but yeah.
Right, it's saying, yeah, hey,
vectorize this loop too,
this is important now.
So, that was the next step,
was to vectorize the rest of this,
so to vectorize the entire function,
and as well as a few other,
there are a few other
optimizations as well.
So, let's try that out.
starting around ten thousand or so
So another 40 to 50% we can eke out by
vectorizing the rest of that function.
You can see some of the gorillas
have gone off into the water.
You can bring them back to life
by dragging them back to land.
They're a bit suicidal.
Yeah, they just like the beach.
All right, so, uh,
we're gonna have 15x or 14x speedup,
that's pretty decent.
Um...
We hope you can all do
that well in your code too.
So the next step, okay, so, no,
don't do that.
We have a few more things to show.
There are a couple of other things
we didn't really talk about.
Shark allows you to manage
the sampling session.
So we've taken about four
sampling sessions here.
You can either look at these in parallel,
right, in a multi-window mode,
or you can put them back and deal
with them one window at a time.
The multi-window mode is nice because
you can put them side by side.
There's also a session drawer.
You can quickly switch
between them in single,
in the single window mode.
And of course, as we mentioned,
you can save sessions.
There's also ancillary
information included.
So whenever you take a session,
it records what kind of machine
it was and gives you some space
to write notes to yourself about
what was happening on this.
So this is archival.
You can keep it around,
remember what happened.
There's also an extensive
user guide included.
So it's just online here.
Please read it.
There's lots more information and
features that are covered in there.
Okay.
So, one other thing we wanted to look at,
we want to use the Monster Tool,
and we want to look at some more--some
of these performance counters in depth.
So, this is the main Monster Window,
and this is the spreadsheet, right?
So, on the left-hand side,
we can see the various performance
counters that are on this system,
and on the right is
the spreadsheet itself.
And the shortcut pop-up is similar to
the sampling config selection on Shark.
Same thing.
But what we can do is we
can edit these shortcuts.
So, if we go to the shortcut tab.
And we're going to look
at DDR memory bandwidth.
Right, so this is--it's just--it's
taking a few of the U3 counters,
the memory controller
counters on this Power Mac G5,
and it's going to calculate
the number of megabytes
transferred over the memory bus.
All right, so the way it does this is it
counts the number of beats,
and each beat is 16
bytes in the data bus,
so it can multiply out and figure
out for every 10 millisecond sample
how many megabytes that means.
So we have a session.
Let's open that.
It's on the desktop, yeah.
There it is.
Right, so if we pop open the run pop-up,
[Transcript missing]
So you can see how as
we optimize the code,
we were able to take better and
better advantage of this bandwidth,
the massive bandwidth that's
available on the Power Mac G5.
So let's go back to the slides, I think.
Right.
Right, so you might wonder--
I guess-- I'll let Sanjay talk.
So you might wonder,
how does this compare against G4?
So we started out with
the regular scalar code.
And on the G4, you get about 1,200 ape
thoughts per second.
We were getting closer
to 1,300 on the G4.
Well, you say, well,
the G4 is running much higher frequency,
and the G4,
we're barely getting a little more
than 10% faster performance here.
So what is the bottleneck?
Well, the initial bottleneck was
all integer performance.
So with the longer latency,
longer pipeline instructions,
you're just not going to get
the full frequency increase
in your performance increase.
So when we went to threaded,
we started to expose the
better bandwidth on the bus.
So because we have two processors,
and they each have independent
point-to-point connections
to the memory controller,
we're running much faster than the G4.
And then we really break this
open when we go to vector.
The G4 does well.
We get a 2.5 or so x
speedup from using vector.
But on G5,
we don't have any bandwidth limit yet.
So we get a full 4x improvement
from going to vector.
So we're going to go to vector.
And we're going to go to vector.
And then with Vector Optimized,
you can see again the
G4 does pretty well.
Nice speed up.
And the G5 gets a 60% speed up.
And that's--you know,
if you look at the back
of that monster chart,
you can see we were getting
peak bandwidths of 2.5
gigabytes a second on the bus.
So we're still not done yet,
but we didn't have more time
to optimize before this demo.
But clearly, you know,
there are a lot of resources there.
And if you start with basic code, well,
you might get a decent
speed up over a G4.
But if you put a little effort into it,
you can get very big speed ups
if you take advantage of AlteVec,
take advantage of all the
bandwidth that's available to you.
Okay, so a third tool we'll talk a
little bit about is Saturn.
Saturn, so the other tool,
so Shark is another profiling
tool that we've talked about.
That provides a statistical profile,
right?
It's periodically
interrupting the system,
recording where you are,
and then going on, right?
And then afterwards, we say, well,
wherever we got the most samples,
that's where the most time was spent.
Well, Saturn is going to instrument
every function in your source
code to give you an exact profile.
So we'll show you, this allows you to
visualize the call tree.
It uses GCC to instrument each
function at entry and exit.
And it records this function
call history to a trace,
and with this we can get call counts,
so how many times each
function was called,
performance monitor counts,
it can use those,
as well as the execution
time of each function,
right, added up.
So if we look at this, this, you know,
at the top we have the
familiar call stack,
you know, call tree view that says,
you know,
how--where we spent time in each function
and its descendants and like that.
And at the bottom we have something
that's--it's viewing the same
data but in a different way.
It's plotting call stack depth vertically
versus time on the horizontal axis.
And what you can use this for,
if you see a very sharp, you know,
narrow spike,
that means that you're spending a
lot of time in calling overhead,
right?
You're not getting--you're
going through many,
many function calls and not
getting a lot of work done if it's
not a wide call or wide stack.
So, okay.
That's it.
Saturn.
And of course the CHED framework.
You can use the CHED framework
to instrument your source code.
You can use this to start
and stop Monster or Shark.
You can also write your
own performance tools.
A lot of the functionality,
almost all of it that's in Shark and
Monster is exposed in this framework.
So you can set up and
start and stop the PMCs,
collect information about the hardware,
a lot of things that otherwise you'd
have to go through I/O Kit and it might
be some extra--a lot of code to get at.
And of course an extensive
HTML reference guide is provided.
Okay, so here's an example of using
the framework to remotely
control either Shark or Monster.
What you do is you pick the profile
that you're interested in and then place
either of those tools in remote mode.
That means allow other tools that
want to connect and control the start
and stop of the counters to do so.
So first we initialize, you know,
acquire remote access,
I mean make sure that another tool is
actually waiting for us to do something,
and this will block if the other
tool isn't currently waiting.
Start the RemotePerfMonitor,
so for this function you can give it a
label that's going to appear in the tool.
Do whatever it is you're interested in,
whatever the code of interest is.
Stop the RemotePerfMonitor and of
course release to be a good citizen.
So that's one way to use the framework,
that's to instrument.
The other way is just more directly,
you can set up the counters
directly and read them directly.
You know, initialize,
acquire the sampling facility.
So there's only one set of
performance counters in the system,
right,
because there's one set of hardware,
there's one physical device.
So you have to acquire
the sampling facility,
the kernel extension that we
have manages access to this.
Set up the counter events,
clear the counters, start the counters,
do whatever it is you're interested in,
stop the counters,
and then process the result.
We also provide some lower level tools.
So if you've ever done, as I mentioned,
AlteVec programming,
or any kind of really intense tuning,
you'd like to know what's
happening on the processor core.
Why is it slower than you expect?
What's happening?
So with Amber,
this is a command line tool to
record an instruction trace to disk.
So this is for all the
threads in a given process.
Record that to disk.
And then you can run that
trace file through ACID.
This is a trace analyzer.
It gives you some
interesting trace statistics.
You can plot the memory footprint
that this trace walks through.
Point out problematic
instruction sequences.
And then you can also run this trace
through SIMG4 for the 7400 processor,
or eventually,
when this is available soon,
the SIMG5 PowerPC 970 simulator
to know exactly what's happening.
Okay, so at this time,
we'll turn it back over to Mark, I think,
for session wrap-up.
Thank you.
So to give you a little bit of
a roadmap of other sessions that
are going to be valuable to you,
the Tuning Software with
Performance Tools,
session 305 this afternoon
at 5:00 in Presidio,
and then the
MacOSX High Performance Libraries.
Again, another set of tools-- really,
libraries are not tools,
but venues here for you to be
able to eke out performance
out of the operating system.
Again,
optimization-- just to go back on my
introductory statements-- should not
always be a process or an afterthought.
Optimization should begin with when
you first start writing your code.
It should be part of the process of
how you want your code to be written.
So you're not going back after the
application is written and think about,
well,
maybe I should thread my application.
I should utilize threading processes.
An application like the Noble 8,
we can add threading because
it's not a lot of code.
But if you're talking about
a much larger application,
a word processor,
a graphic imaging editing application,
then you're looking at a whole redesign,
possibly,
and then it becomes more frustrating.
So again,
optimization should be something
that is both at the beginning of your
project as well as an afterthought
of once you've finished your project,
how do you get more
performance out of it?
You know,
the other thing I wanted to mention
is that the G5 PowerPC processor
is a very unique architecture,
much different than the G4,
as Sanjay pointed out in
his session presentation.
And for that reason,
we want to make sure that you have as
many resources available for you to
understand what those differences are
and how to take advantage of that.
All week, we have been running a G5
optimization lab on the first
floor in the California room.
I urge you to visit,
talk to the many engineers that
have made themselves available,
spending countless hours.
Monday and Tuesday,
we were there until midnight.
You'll be able to talk to Sanjay, Nathan,
and several other engineers,
both from Apple and IBM,
throughout the week.
As well, we'll have follow-on kitchens
available to you as developers in
the developer program at Cupertino,
following the developers conference.